[John Clarke] Well I think that a lot of the
things Fred Dagg did weren't jokes, umm, they
were to do with language and the way and the
pace with which things are expressed, and
only my own culture was ever going to understand
that.
If I'd done Fred Dagg in England, I would
have to have done very much more jokey stuff,
I'd have to have done much broader stuff.
I couldn't have done anything terribly subtle.
I mean I'm not arguing that there was a lot
of Fred Dagg that was infinitely subtle or
anything, but there were parts of the way
that the talk worked that would only have
been understood by New Zealand, and I didn't
have to do too much of it, because in all
of our heads the rest of it was sitting there.
[Kiwi bloke -- actor's voice] I think I've
found a new calling in life - gumboot throwing.
I knew I had to be good at something.
Maybe I'll retire to Taihape to be a full-time
gumboot tosser.
After a few warm-ups, I was handed a pair
of regulation size 8 men's gumboots.
Like golf, this is all about timing.
If you relax, make sure the boot is facing
forwards and release it with a fluid swing
of your arm, it will fly with the grace of
an eagle.
I am proud to say that my best effort did
just that, sailing past the end of the lane
to about 28 metres.
[Narrator] Before the 1970s, New Zealanders
tended to be entertained by imported English
humour.
Then television took hold and American sitcoms
became popular.
But on a serious weekly television show about
farming called Country Calendar, which is
still going, a mysterious farmer called Fred
Dagg, appeared.
Wearing a black shearer's singlet, baggy khaki
shorts and gumboots, Fred had a laconic delivery
and an unmistakable New Zealand accent.
The creation of comedian John Clarke, Fred
Dagg delighted in lampooning rural New Zealand.
And many of his jokes were at the expense
of Taihape.
Fred Dagg would refer to his time at Taihape's
Gumboot University and labelled the town 'the
gumboot capital of the world'.
A gumboot is the Kiwi term for a pair of rubber
Wellington boots.
Most New Zealand farmers wear black gumboots
on the farm as they are ideal footwear in
mud and water.
Though by the 1970s most New Zealanders lived
in cities, Kiwis loved Fred Dagg.
He was the first New Zealand comic to really
use rural life as the wellspring of his humour.
Fred performed on television, and released
records including 'Where would you be without
your gumboots' and 'We don't know how lucky
we are.'
Yet before long Fred Dagg disappeared.
John Clarke moved to Australia where he established
a highly successful career as a satirist,
scriptwriter and performer.
And the rural way of life that Fred Dagg portrayed
so amusingly also disappeared.
During the mid 1980s, the Labour government
slashed agricultural subsidies.
Faced with the withdrawal of taxpayer funding,
farmers stopped spending.
This impacted on rural towns that depended
on farmers' chequebooks to survive.
Taihape, a rural service centre, suffered
more than most.
At the same time, the government cut spending
on New Zealand Railways, the other main contributor
to Taihape's economy.
Thousands of jobs vanished throughout the
country, lines closed and services were reduced.
Taihape, situated on the main trunk line,
faced an uncertain future.
The town's population of 3,500 in the 1960s
almost halved to around 1,800 in 1985.
Faced with this crisis, concerned citizens
gathered to brainstorm a solution.
They decided that their town needed a new
identity.
It didn't take them long to realise that Fred
Dagg might have the answer.
Taihape branded itself 'the gumboot capital
of the world', and celebrated with Gumboot
Day.
Held on Easter Tuesday 1985, the first Gumboot
Day included gumboot-throwing contests, Fred
Dagg lookalike competitions and gumboot decorating.
Its success encouraged the organisers to make
it an annual fixture.
The current record for gumboot throwing stands
at just under 37 metres for men and nearly
25 metres for women.
This is well short of the world record set
in 1996 in Finland by Teppo Luoma, who hurled
a boot nearly 64 metres.
Taihape has now recovered from the dark days
of the 1980s.
As motorists approach Taihape from the north,
they are greeted by a large corrugated iron
sculpture of a gumboot, the work of renowned
artist, Jeff Thomson.
Though the rail service is greatly reduced,
motorists frequently stop for a coffee or
meal at one of the cafes that have sprung
up in the town.
And Gumboot Day continues to attract visitors
from New Zealand and overseas.